\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@settitle Dialog Mode
@setfilename dialog-mode.info
@paragraphindent 0
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2023-2026 Morgan Willcock

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual'',
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License''.

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to copy and
modify this GNU manual.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs languages
@direntry
* Dialog Mode: (dialog-mode).  Support for editing Dialog files.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Dialog Mode
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents


@node Top
@top Dialog Mode

Version @value{VERSION}.

@menu
* Overview::
* Syntax highlighting::
* Indentation::
* Motion commands::
* Paragraphs::
* Imenu support::
* Outline support::
* Configuring game files::
* Flymake support::
* Xref support::
* Interactive debugger::
* Browsing the Dialog manual::

Appendices

* GNU Free Documentation License::

Indices

* Keystroke Index::
* Function Index::
* Variable Index::
* Index::

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Overview

* Installation::
* Example configuration::

Indentation

* Code alignment::

Paragraphs

* Auto Fill support::

Interactive debugger

* Sending commands::
* The debug buffer::
* Disabling the command interpreter::
* Using a pseudo-terminal::
* Dismissing game prompts::
* Viewing game state information::
* Trace output::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview
@cindex overview
@cindex package overview

@include features.texi

@menu
* Installation::
* Example configuration::
@end menu


@node Installation
@section Installation
@cindex installation

@include installation.texi


@node Example configuration
@section Example configuration
@cindex configuration @subentry example

@include example-configuration.texi


@node Syntax highlighting
@chapter Syntax highlighting
@cindex font-lock
@cindex fontification
@cindex highlighting @subentry of errors
@cindex highlighting @subentry of syntax
@cindex syntax highlighting

Syntax highlighting is implemented for Dialog syntax using the
following font-lock faces:

@multitable {@samp{*} (as a prefix or in a rule)} {@code{dialog-escape-sequence-face}}
@headitem Syntax @tab Face
@item Topic @tab @code{dialog-topic-name-face}
@item Escape sequence @tab @code{dialog-escape-sequence-face}
@item Object name @tab @code{dialog-object-name-face}
@item Variable name @tab @code{dialog-variable-name-face}
@item @samp{*} (as a prefix or in a rule) @tab @code{dialog-operator-face}
@item @samp{@@} (as a prefix) @tab @code{dialog-operator-face}
@item @samp{~} (as a prefix) @tab @code{dialog-operator-face}
@item @samp{$} (in a rule) @tab @code{dialog-operator-face}
@item @samp{|} (in a rule) @tab @code{dialog-delimiter-face}
@item @samp{@{} @samp{@}} @tab @code{dialog-brace-face}
@item @samp{[} @samp{]} @tab @code{dialog-bracket-face}
@item @samp{(} @samp{)} @tab @code{dialog-paren-face}
@item Block-defining syntax @tab @code{dialog-special-block-face}
@end multitable

Block-defining syntax is any built-in syntax which has the form of a
rule and defines a logical block.  This includes the following forms:

@example dialog
(if) ... (then) ... (elseif) ... (then) ... (else) ... (endif)
(select) ... (or) ... (or) ... (stopping)
(select) ... (or) ... (or) ... (cycling)
(select) ... (or) ... (or) ... (at random)
(select) ... (or) ... (or) ... (purely at random)
(select) ... (or) ... (or) ... (then at random)
(select) ... (or) ... (or) ... (then purely at random)
(accumulate $Element) ... (into $Sum)
(collect $Element) ... (into $List)
(collect words) ... (into $List)
(determine object $Obj) ... (from words) ... (matching all of $List)
@end example

Three levels of font-lock are available for selection based on the
value of customization variable @code{font-lock-maximum-decoration}.
To improve performance and reduce visual distraction, it may be
preferable to use the second font-lock level which removes
highlighting for block-defining syntax, braces, brackets, and
parentheses.  It is relatively easy to manually re-add font-lock rules
for matching braces, brackets, or parentheses should it be required;
escaped characters are still highlighted by the second font-lock level
and so a later non-overriding match for these characters will always
be correct.

@example lisp
;; Use second level syntax-highlighting for dialog-mode and the
;; highest level which is available for all other modes.
(setq font-lock-maximum-decoration '((dialog-mode . 2) (t . t)))

;; Re-add font-lock for parentheses in dialog-mode.
(font-lock-add-keywords
 'dialog-mode '(("[()]" . dialog-paren-face)) 'append)
@end example

The additional face @code{dialog-warning-face} is used to highlight
usage of syntax which is likely incorrect.  This currently applies to
invalid escape sequences and any usage of the characters @samp{#},
@samp{$}, @samp{*}, @samp{@@}, @samp{|}, and @samp{~} in the wrong
context.


@node Indentation
@chapter Indentation
@cindex block
@cindex indent
@cindex indentation

Dialog Mode calculates the indentation level for a given line based on
existing indentation levels, the usage of braces, brackets, and
parentheses, and the use of special Dialog syntax which creates a
logical block.  The indentation behavior can be generally defined as:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If the current line has no indentation the indentation level will not
be changed.  Column 0 might be thought of as ``sticky''.
@item
The indentation level is incremented if at least one previous line has
no indentation and the current line is indented by any amount.
@item
The indentation level is incremented inside braces, brackets, and
parentheses.
@item
The indentation level is incremented for lines following special
syntax which defines a logical block.
@end itemize

There are two excepts to the above which are configured by default,
both implemented to match conventions used by the Dialog standard
library and example code:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The indentation level inside braces is not incremented when the
opening brace is not immediately followed by a white-space character.
@item
The indentation level is decremented for a line which only contains
the syntax @samp{(or)} with an optional trailing comment.
@end itemize

The default configuration uses 8 columns per level of indentation,
although the first level is taken as a special case.  The indentation
size can be configured by modifying the values of the customization
variables @code{dialog-indent-offset} and
@code{dialog-indent-initial-size}.

@defopt dialog-indent-offset
Specifies the number of columns used for indentation per block level.
@end defopt

@defopt dialog-indent-initial-size
Specifies a multiplier used for the first level of indentation.  If
working on a game where the first level of indentation is twice the
expected size, set this value to 2.
@end defopt

It is possible to enable or disable indentation inside braces,
brackets, and parentheses, by modifying the value of the customization
variable @code{dialog-indent-inside-block}, which is a regular
expression to be matched at the opening position of the block.  A
match means that the indentation level will be increased.

@defopt dialog-indent-inside-block
Specifies a regular expression which should be matched for indentation
to be increased within braces, brackets, and parentheses.  The match
is made with point before the character which opens the block.
@end defopt

Adding extra indentation for lines following special syntax such as
@samp{(if)} can be disabled by modifying the value of the
customization variable @code{dialog-indent-inside-special-syntax}.

@defopt dialog-indent-inside-special-syntax
Specifies whether lines following special block-defining syntax will
have their indentation level increased.  A non-nil value means that
additional indentation is applied.
@end defopt

To configure which lines inside a block will have indentation removed
to match the indentation level of the block-opening, modify the
customization variable @code{dialog-dedent-line}.

@defopt dialog-dedent-line
Specifies a regular expression which should match lines that will have
one level of indentation removed.  The match is made with point at the
indentation column for the line.
@end defopt

@cindex electric-indent-mode @subentry indentation
@kindex C-c TAB
If @code{electric-indent-mode} is enabled, lines will be re-indented
as newline characters are inserted.  The exception to this is when the
newline is inserted on a line which begins in column 0, in which case
the indentation will not be be modified.  This means that when writing
rule-heads the next line is assumed to be another rule-head, and when
writing a rule-body the next line is assumed to be a continuation of
that same rule body.  Adding and removing the leading white-space on
the line will effectively toggle between the two indentation
behaviors, the command @code{dialog-toggle-indent} can be used to do
this from anywhere on the line and is bound to @kbd{C-c TAB} by
default.

@defun dialog-toggle-indent
Toggle indentation on the current line.  When called from a position
which is less than or equal to the indentation column, move to the
indentation column.  The size of the inserted indentation will be
appropriate the current block level.
@end defun

@menu
* Code alignment::
@end menu


@node Code alignment
@section Code alignment
@cindex align
@cindex alignment @subentry of indentation
@cindex code alignment @subentry indentation

Dialog Mode defines support for aligning code that shares a line with
a rule-head.  These operations are performed by built-in Emacs
commands such as @code{align}, @code{align-current}, and
@code{align-entire}.  For example, when alignment is performed on the
following code:

@example dialog
(story title)Cloak of Darkness
(story author)          Linus Åkesson
(story noun)  A port of Roger Firth's reference game
@end example

the result will be similar to:

@example dialog
(story title)   Cloak of Darkness
(story author)  Linus Åkesson
(story noun)    A port of Roger Firth's reference game
@end example

@quotation Note
The @code{align} command operates on the current region as defined by
point and mark, even when the region is not considered to be active.
@end quotation

The alignment rules are defined in the customization variable
@code{dialog-align-rules-list}, with the default rules specifying that
all white-space adjustments used for alignment should align with a
tab-stop.

@defopt dialog-align-rules-list
Specifies the list of available alignment rules which will configured
in Dialog Mode buffers and available for use by alignment commands.
The rule format is the same as rules configured in the variable
@code{align-rules-list}.
@end defopt

To align indentation without considering tab-stops the default rules
may be adjusted; the following example shows how to modify the
tab-stop preference within the existing rule:

@example lisp
;; Configure alignment to ignore tab-stops.
(setf (alist-get 'tab-stop
                 (alist-get 'dialog-rule-body
                            dialog-align-rules-list))
      nil)
@end example


@node Motion commands
@chapter Motion commands
@cindex rule @subentry navigation @seealso{Imenu support}
@cindex rule @subentry selection
@cindex motion
@cindex navigation
@cindex navigation @subentry function @seealso{Outline support}
@cindex selection

Dialog Mode permits navigation around and selection of rule
definitions with commands such as @code{beginning-of-defun},
@code{end-of-defun}, and @code{mark-defun}; an Emacs @samp{defun}
broadly translates to a Dialog rule, from the beginning of the
rule-head to where the rule-body is terminated.

@kindex C-c C-n
@kindex C-c C-p
For moving by paragraph the commands @code{dialog-forward-paragraph}
and @code{dialog-backward-paragraph} are bound to @kbd{C-c C-n} and
@kbd{C-c C-p} respectively.  What is deemed to be a paragraph in this
context is configurable and tries to align with the buffer regions
which are modified when using fill commands, see @ref{Paragraphs} for
more details.

@defun dialog-forward-paragraph
Move forwards by Dialog paragraph.
@end defun

@defun dialog-backward-paragraph
Move backwards by Dialog paragraph.
@end defun

@kindex C-c C-u
An additional navigation function is also provided in the form of
@code{dialog-up-block}, which moves to the opening of the current
logical block, and is bound to @kbd{C-c C-u} by default.  When point
is moved by using @code{dialog-up-block}, the value of the
customization variable @code{dialog-block-motion-push-mark} determines
whether the mark ring is modified.

@defun dialog-up-block
Move to the opening of the current logical block.  This is typically
an opening @samp{@{} or @samp{[} character, the beginning of the
current rule, or before any special syntax such as @samp{(if)} which
opens a logical block.
@end defun

@defopt dialog-block-motion-push-mark
Determines whether block-based motion (such as by calling
@code{dialog-up-block}) will modify the mark ring.  A non-@code{nil}
value indicates that block motion commands are permitted to push the
previous location to the mark-ring when the value of point changes.
@end defopt

See also: @ref{Imenu support} and @ref{Outline support}.


@node Paragraphs
@chapter Paragraphs
@cindex paragraph
@cindex filling

Since text in a Dialog Mode buffer will tend to be a mix of regular
text and Dialog syntax, filling functions and commands such as
@code{dialog-forward-paragraph} and @code{dialog-backward-paragraph}
are configured to use additional rules to identify where a paragraph
begins and ends.  Non-comment lines will be split into paragraphs
based on:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Changes in the indentation level.
@item
Lines which are not indented.
@item
Lines which are empty or only contain white-space characters.
@item
Lines which have trailing comments.
@item
The value of the customization variable
@code{dialog-paragraph-delimiter}.
@end itemize

The default value of @code{dialog-paragraph-delimiter} is a regular
expression which will match specific lines of syntax, it is also
possible to use a custom regular expression or function.

@defopt dialog-paragraph-delimiter
Specifies the configuration of an additional paragraph delimiter which
is used to differentiate general text from Dialog syntax by closing
and re-opening a paragraph.  A string value is taken as a regular
expression.  A function value is taken as a function to call which
takes no arguments.  Regular expression matches and function calls are
made with point at the indentation column.  A value of @code{t} will
match on every non-comment line, effectively limiting the definition
of a paragraph to a single line.  A value of @code{nil} means that no
additional delimiter is used.
@end defopt

@menu
* Auto Fill support::
@end menu


@node Auto Fill support
@section Auto Fill support
@cindex Auto Fill

Dialog Mode supports the use of @code{auto-fill-mode} to automatically
wrap lines as they are typed.

When typing inside a rule-body, the fill is restricted to the current
paragraph as defined by the rules described in @ref{Paragraphs}.

When typing on a line which has no indentation and contains
non-comment syntax, the Auto Fill functionality is suppressed to
ensure that the line remains syntactically valid.


@node Imenu support
@chapter Imenu support
@cindex Imenu

Imenu provides indexing and navigation menus used to jump to points of
interest in the current buffer.

The Imenu index will contain all rule-heads and topics.  To assist in
determining which rule-head is which, if a rule-head or rule-body uses
a @samp{*} to reference the current topic the topic name will be
joined to the start of the menu entry using the string stored in the
customization variable @code{dialog-imenu-topic-separator} as a
separator.

@defopt dialog-imenu-topic-separator
Specifies the string used to join the current topic to the beginning
of an Imenu menu entry, should it be a rule which references the
current topic.
@end defopt

@cindex which-function-mode @subentry using Imenu data
For very large buffers, scanning for index entries can potentially be
slow, although automatic re-scanning may be preferable to manually
invoking the @samp{*Rescan*} option from the menu.  Consider
configuring @code{imenu-auto-rescan} and
@code{imenu-auto-rescan-maxout} to suitable values, bearing in mind
that some other Emacs features may also be using Imenu data.  If using
@code{which-function-mode}, which uses Imenu data to display the
context of the current buffer position, @code{imenu-auto-rescan}
should probably be set to @code{t} unless there is a noticeable
performance issue or no buffer changes are being made.


@node Outline support
@chapter Outline support
@cindex Outline
@cindex outline

Outline Mode is major mode intended to edit outline-format documents
with selective display.  The same functionality is also available
through alternate key-bindings using the minor mode version, enabled
by invoking @code{outline-minor-mode}.

Dialog Mode defines Outline settings by borrowing some conventions for
headings and their associated @emph{depth} from the built-in Lisp
mode.  Three types of headings are defined:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Comments created by three or more @samp{%} characters at the beginning
of a line, followed by at least one white-space character.
@item
Topics.
@item
Rule-heads.
@end itemize

The @emph{depth} of comment-based headings is determined by
subtracting 2 from the number of @samp{%} characters which were used.
For example, the following comments define Outline headings for the
first three levels:

@example dialog
%%% Level 1 heading
%%%% Level 2 heading
%%%%% Level 3 heading
@end example

The @emph{depth} of rule-head and topic based headings is not
variable; Rule-heads have the maximum possible value for their depth,
while topics have the maximum possible value minus 1, i.e. rule-heads
are folded inside topics and topics are folded inside comment-based
headings.


@node Configuring game files
@chapter Configuring game files
@cindex Configuring game files

The variable @code{dialog-game-files} specifies which file names are
relevant to the current game.  It is intended to be used as a
directory local variable to allow the file names to vary per project.

@defvar dialog-game-files
A list of strings which specifies the files relevant to the current
game.  The order of the files in the @code{dialog-game-files} list is
significant in the same way it is when compiling or manually running
the debug program.
@end defvar

A typical @samp{.dir-locals.el} file might look like this:

@example lisp
((nil . ((dialog-game-files . ("cloak.dg" "stdlib.dg")))))
@end example

Setting the value of @code{dialog-game-files} by other methods should
also work.  Taking a guess by looking for files with a @samp{.dg}
extension as the major mode is being initialized is potentially
inefficient and error prone but may be suitable for smaller projects
where the debug process is only managed from Dialog Mode buffers.  The
following example presumes that the sorted list of file names will
give the correct order once standard libraries are moved to the end of
the list:

@example lisp
(add-hook 'dialog-mode-hook
          (lambda ()
            (unless dialog-game-files
              (let ((files (directory-files
                            default-directory nil "\\.dg\\'")))
                ;; Move standard libraries to the end of the list.
                (dolist (lib '("stddebug.dg" "stdlib.dg"))
                  (when (member lib files)
                    (setq files (append (delete lib files) (list lib)))))
                (setq dialog-game-files files)))))
@end example

The game file names should be specified as relative to the current
project root as determined by @code{project}.  If the game source code
is being version controlled it is likely that no further configuration
will be required, in other cases it may be required to find another
way to identify the project root.  One way to do this is by using the
standard library file name as project root marker:

@example lisp
(with-eval-after-load 'project
  (add-to-list 'project-vc-extra-root-markers "stdlib.dg"))
@end example

If the project root cannot be determined the current working directory
is used instead.  This is likely to be less reliable and limits some
functionality to buffers which also happen to have the correct working
directory.


@node Flymake support
@chapter Flymake support
@cindex Flymake

Dialog Mode includes a Flymake back-end which is implemented by
compiling the game in the background and looking at messages generated
by the Dialog compiler.  The customization variable
@code{dialog-compiler-program} specifies how to find the compiler.

@defopt dialog-compiler-program
Specifies the name of the Dialog compiler executable, either a name to
be located somewhere on PATH or an absolute path to the file name.
@end defopt

Compilation runs using the original source files, as determined by
@code{dialog-game-files} (see @ref{Configuring game files}), and
because of this Dialog Mode buffers default the value of
@code{flymake-no-changes-timeout} to @code{nil} to avoid needlessly
running the compiler as the buffer is being edited.


@node Xref support
@chapter Xref support
@cindex Xref

Dialog Mode supports @emph{definition} and @emph{reference} look-ups
by pattern-matching the text which makes up a rule or query.  A
look-up for @emph{definitions} will return all successful
pattern-matches for syntax in a rule-head.  A look-up for
@emph{references} will return all successful pattern-matches for
syntax regardless of how that syntax is indented.

Pattern matches are made against the text that remains once all
numbers, objects, variables, dictionary words, and references to the
current topic have been removed.  Exceptions are made for the
declarations of interfaces and global variables, in which case the
inner-syntax form is used in-place of the syntax which appears at the
top level of the declaration.  For example, the following lines will
all successfully pattern-match with each other:

@example dialog
(increase score by 1)
(increase score by $Delta)
(interface (increase score by $<Delta))
@end example

The identifier for the lookup is the entirety of the syntax which
makes up a rule or query, with white-space collapsed down to a single
space character, and with comments removed.

To locate the usage of specific names within the identifier, such as
any rules or queries which include specific object names, it is
recommended to search within the identifiers of all @emph{references}
by using the command @code{xref-find-apropos} and entering a regular
expression.

@quotation
Note: Xref functionality does not depend on any external programs to
search for matches; searches are made by opening and searching the
original source files of the current game, as determined by
@code{dialog-game-files} (see @ref{Configuring game files}).  When a
search is initiated, any source files which are not currently open
will be opened and will remain open after the searches have ended.
@end quotation


@node Interactive debugger
@chapter Interactive debugger
@cindex debugging
@cindex interactive @subentry debugging
@cindex running the game @subentry debugging

Dialog includes a debug program which is designed to run a game in an
environment where its state can be inspected and modified.  Dialog
Mode includes support for running the debug program as a command
interpreter, meaning that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A game can be run directly in an Emacs buffer.
@item
For any purpose, commands can be sent by Emacs to update a running
game's state.
@item
For any purpose, debug output can be intercepted by Emacs.
@end itemize

The debug program will be started with the game files specified by the
value of the variable @code{dialog-game-files}, see @ref{Configuring
game files}.

@kindex C-c C-z
The command @code{dialog-debug-run}, bound to @kbd{C-c C-z} by
default, is used to start the debug program named by the customization
variable @code{dialog-debug-program} using the current game files and
switch to the debug buffer.  The same command is also used to switch
to an existing debug buffer.  If no game files are configured or
@code{dialog-debug-run} was called with a prefix argument, a prompt
will appear to select the game files.  With a double prefix argument
the game directory can also be selected.

@quotation Note
The prompt for game files is a prompt to select multiple files, where
the completion interface will likely expect that commas are used to
separate each selected file.  The files selected at the prompt are not
stored in any way; the intended purpose of the prompts is to
temporarily override the current settings rather than initialize them.
@end quotation

@defopt dialog-debug-program
Specifies the name of the Dialog debugger executable, either a name to
be located somewhere on PATH or an absolute path to the file name.
@end defopt

@defun dialog-debug-run
Start the debug program as a command interpreter process, display its
buffer, and switch to that buffer.  If the process already exists,
just display and switch to buffer which is associated with that
process.  When called with a single prefix argument, always prompt for
the game files.  When called with a double prefix argument, always
prompt for the game directory and the game files.
@end defun

@kindex C-c C-b
To display an existing debug buffer without switching to it, the
separate command @code{dialog-debug-display-buffer} is available and
bound to @kbd{C-c C-b} by default.

@defun dialog-debug-display-buffer
Display an existing debug buffer.
@end defun

See @ref{The debug buffer} for details on how the ``current'' debug
buffer and process is determined.

@menu
* Sending commands::
* The debug buffer::
* Disabling the command interpreter::
* Using a pseudo-terminal::
* Dismissing game prompts::
* Viewing game state information::
* Trace output::
@end menu


@node Sending commands
@section Sending commands
@cindex sending commands @subentry when debugging

@kindex C-c C-c
Once the Dialog debugger has been started it is possible to send debug
commands (either input for the game or debugger specific syntax) to
the debug program as if they had been manually typed at a terminal.
The command @code{dialog-debug-send-command} can be used to send a
debug command, either the default command as defined by the
customization variable @code{dialog-debug-send-command-default}, or by
prompting for a command to send if called with a prefix argument.

@defun dialog-debug-send-command
With a prefix argument, prompt for text to send as a command to the
current debug process, otherwise send the value of
@code{dialog-debug-send-command-default}.
@end defun

@defopt dialog-debug-send-command-default
Specifies the default command to the send to the debug program.
@end defopt

When using the prompt to send a debug command, a list of preset
commands is made available to the completion interface which will
handle the prompt.  The value of
@code{dialog-debug-send-command-default} determines whether the
command entered at the prompt will become the new default command.  To
update the default command directly using a similar prompt, use
@code{dialog-debug-set-default-command}.

@defopt dialog-debug-send-command-prompt-sets-default
Determines whether the command most recently specified at the prompt
will become the new default command by updating the value of
@code{dialog-debug-send-command-default}.
@end defopt

@defun dialog-debug-set-default-command
Prompt for a command which will become the new default command by
setting the value of @code{dialog-debug-send-command-default}.
@end defun

The list of preset commands and their descriptions may be edited or
entirely replaced by changing the value of the customization variable
@code{dialog-debug-send-command-presets}.

@defopt dialog-debug-send-command-presets
An alist of commands which should be valid to send to the debug
program and their descriptions.  Commands present in this list will be
suggested during command completion and are also made available to
send using menus.
@end defopt

@kindex C-c C-e
It is also possible to send debug commands represented by lines of
text in Dialog Mode buffers, using the commands
@code{dialog-debug-send-command-from-line},
@code{dialog-debug-send-command-from-region}, and
@code{dialog-debug-send-command-dwim}, the last of which is bound to
@kbd{C-c C-e} by default.

@defun dialog-debug-send-command-from-line
Send the current line as a debug command.
@end defun

@defun dialog-debug-send-command-from-region
Send the lines from the currently active region as debug commands.
@end defun

@defun dialog-debug-send-command-dwim
If there is an active region, send the lines from it as debug
commands, otherwise send the current line as a debug command.
@end defun

In all cases any leading comment syntax is removed from lines before
sending them as commands.  This allows test input to stored in the
game's source files, for example:

@example dialog
%% west
%% hang cloak on hook
%% east
%% south
%% look at message
@end example

The customization variable @code{dialog-debug-send-command-hook} is a
list of functions to call before the command is sent, at which time
the current command to send is stored in the variable
@code{dialog-debug-send-command-input}.

@defopt dialog-debug-send-command-hook
A hook which is called before sending a debug command.
@end defopt

@defvar dialog-debug-send-command-input
Stores the current debug command being sent to the debug program.
@end defvar

@cindex command hooks @subentry for debugging
@cindex hot-reload @subentry when debugging
One interesting feature of the Dialog debug program is that, if game
source files are modified while the debug program is running, the
files are reloaded and any changes are incorporated into the game
state.  The default value of @code{dialog-debug-send-command-hook}
will cause a prompt to save any unsaved buffers, but the following
example shows how to further streamline the process by automatically
saving the current Dialog Mode buffer when the debug command being
sent is @samp{@@replay}.  This makes sending the @samp{@@replay}
command an equivalent of hot-reload for incorporating the latest
buffer changes:

@example lisp
(add-hook 'dialog-debug-send-command-hook
          (lambda ()
            (when (and (derived-mode-p 'dialog-mode)
                       (equal dialog-debug-send-command-input "@@replay"))
              (save-buffer))))
@end example


@node The debug buffer
@section The debug buffer
@cindex the debug buffer @subentry debugging
@cindex determining the current debug buffer @subentry when debugging

@findex dialog-debug-mode
@kindex C-c C-c
@kindex C-c C-z
The buffer which runs the debug process will use
@code{dialog-debug-mode} as its major mode.  The majority of the
default @code{comint} key-bindings are still present in this mode,
with the exception of @kbd{C-c C-c} which is bound to
@code{dialog-debug-send-command} (see @ref{Sending commands}) and
@kbd{C-c C-z} which is bound to @code{quit-window}.

With the exception of when @code{dialog-debug-send-command} is called
directly from the debug buffer, any functionality which needs to refer
to the current debug buffer or running debug process will do so by
looking for the buffer name specified in the customization variable
@code{dialog-debug-buffer-name}.

@defopt dialog-debug-buffer-name
Specifies the name to use when creating or looking for the Dialog
debug buffer.
@end defopt

Renaming an existing debug buffer will effectively ``detach'' it from
functions which are looking to use it, allowing a new debug buffer to
be created in its place.


@node Disabling the command interpreter
@section Disabling the command interpreter
@cindex disabling the command interpreter @subentry when debugging

To run the debug program directly instead of as a command interpreter,
set the value @code{dialog-debug-as-interp} to @code{nil}.  This
reduces the functionality of the command @code{dialog-debug-run} to a
convenient way to launch an external program.

@defopt dialog-debug-as-interp
Specifies whether the debug program runs as a command interpreter.  A
non-@code{nil} value will start the debug program as a command
interpreter, which enables interactive debugging and sending commands
to the game as it is running.  A value of @code{nil} means that the
process is launched directly with no further process interaction,
which probably only makes sense if the debug program is a graphical
application.
@end defopt

@cindex Windows support @subentry for debugging
@cindex AutoHotkey @subentry for debugging
Dialog provides two debug programs for use on Microsoft Windows;
@command{dgdebug} is the Windows build of the debugger designed for
use in a terminal, while @command{dgdebug_gui} is an alternative build
which runs in a graphical window.  If using the graphical debugger,
the value of @code{dialog-debug-as-interp} should be set to nil.
Switching to the graphical debugger means that there is no direct
method for Emacs to send debug commands to the debugger.  It is still
possible to send commands indirectly by configuring the value of the
customization variable @code{dialog-debug-send-command-function} to a
suitable function.

@defopt dialog-debug-send-command-function
Specifies the function which will be used to send a debug command to
the debug program.  At the time that the function is called the value
to be sent is stored in the variable
@code{dialog-debug-send-command-input}.
@end defopt

As an example of custom configuration, the following example shows how
to switch to the graphical version of the Windows debug program and
how to send commands to it using AutoHotkey (available at
@url{https://www.autohotkey.com/}):

@example lisp
(defconst dialog-debug-send-ahk-script
  "
command := EnvGet('DIALOG_DEBUG_COMMAND')
SetTitleMatchMode 3  ; Exact match for window title.
Try @{
    ControlSend command '@{Enter@}',, 'Dialog Interactive Debugger'
@}
Catch @{
    Exit 1
@}
"
  "The AutoHotkey send command script.")

(defun dialog-debug-send-command-with-ahk ()
  "Send a command to the debug program window using AutoHotkey."
  (let ((process-environment
         (cons
          (concat "DIALOG_DEBUG_COMMAND=" dialog-debug-send-command-input)
          process-environment)))
    (message "Sending command '%s' using AutoHotkey"
             dialog-debug-send-command-input)
    (unless (eq 0 (with-temp-buffer
                    (insert dialog-debug-send-ahk-script)
                    (call-process-region (point-min) (point-max)
                                         "autohotkey" nil nil nil "*")))
      (message "Failed to send command"))))

(setq dialog-debug-program "dgdebug_gui")
(setq dialog-debug-as-interp nil)
(setq dialog-debug-send-command-function
      #'dialog-debug-send-command-with-ahk)
@end example


@node Using a pseudo-terminal
@section Using a pseudo-terminal
@cindex pseudo-terminal
@cindex using a pseudo-terminal @subentry when debugging

To make the debug process work more like it does in a regular
terminal, the value of @code{dialog-debug-use-pty} should be set to
@code{t}, which is the recommended and default value.  The main
benefits of using a pseudo-terminal are that the text output supports
styling and will be automatically wrapped to the Emacs window size
instead of assuming a fixed width.  Setting
@code{dialog-debug-use-pty} to nil may be useful to completely avoid
output paging.

@defopt dialog-debug-use-pty
Specifies whether the debug process runs using a pseudo-terminal.  A
value of @code{nil} indicates to use pipes instead of a
pseudo-terminal.  A value of @code{t} indicates to use a
pseudo-terminal.  Note that the debug buffer needs to be recreated for
changes to this variable to take effect.
@end defopt

@cindex dismissing debugger prompts @subentry when debugging
@findex dialog-debug-auto-response-mode
The minor mode @code{dialog-debug-auto-response-mode} can be enabled
in @code{dialog-debug-mode} buffers to switch on automatic responses
to game output.  This is useful when using a pseudo-terminal because
debug output is potentially paged based on the debug buffer's current
window dimensions and the length of the output.
@code{dialog-debug-auto-response-mode} will automatically dismiss any
@samp{[more]} prompts which appear.


@node Dismissing game prompts
@section Dismissing game prompts
@cindex dismissing game prompts @subentry when debugging

Any prompts which originate from the standard library are expected to
be handled by Dialog debug extensions which are loaded during game
development.  For example, to skip any ``yes/no'' prompts without
waiting for input, define a new rule for the @samp{(yesno)} predicate
which always succeeds:

@example dialog
(yesno)  %% Automatically accept yes/no prompts.
@end example


@node Viewing game state information
@section Viewing game state information
@cindex game state information
@cindex viewing game state information @subentry when debugging

@findex dialog-debug-auto-command-mode
When a game is running in the debug buffer, it is possible to
automatically send additional commands every time that a new prompt
for game input appears.  The minor mode
@code{dialog-debug-auto-command-mode} is enabled by default in debug
buffers and is pre-configured to send the commands @samp{@@dynamic}
and @samp{@@tree}.  The command and command output will not be
displayed in the debug buffer, instead being inserted into the buffer
which is stored in the buffer-local variable
@code{dialog-debug-auto-command-buffer}.  The customization variables
@code{dialog-debug-auto-command-hook} and
@code{dialog-debug-auto-command-setup-hook} can be used to act on
command output and are pre-configured to generate additional buffers
which represents game state information.

@defvar dialog-debug-auto-command-buffer
The buffer stored in this variable contains the command and output
from a command which was automatically sent.
@end defvar

@defopt dialog-debug-auto-command-hook
Functions added to this hook are called when the game prompt reappears
after automatically sending a command.
@end defopt

@defopt dialog-debug-auto-command-setup-hook
Functions added to this hook are called when the game prompt appears
before any commands are automatically sent.
@end defopt

@findex dialog-data-mode
@kindex C-c C-d d
@kindex C-c C-d t
If using the pre-configured hook values, two buffers containing game
state information will be created or updated every time that the
prompt for input reappears.  Both of these buffers use the major mode
@code{dialog-data-mode} and are named with a buffer name that is
derived from the current debug buffer name.  The commands
@code{dialog-data-display-dynamic} and @code{dialog-data-display-tree}
will display these buffers and have the key-bindings @kbd{C-c C-d d}
and @kbd{C-c C-d t} respectively in @code{dialog-mode} and
@code{dialog-debug-mode} buffers.  It is presumed that any specific
requirements around how or where @code{dialog-data-mode} buffers
should be displayed will have been handled through the configuration
of @code{display-buffer-alist} (see @ref{Example configuration}).

@defun dialog-data-display-dynamic
Display the buffer which contains data derived from the
@samp{@@dynamic} command for the current debug buffer.
@end defun

@defun dialog-data-display-tree
Display the buffer which contains data derived from the @samp{@@tree}
command for the current debug buffer.
@end defun


@node Trace output
@section Trace output
@cindex trace
@cindex tracing
@cindex following @subentry trace output

Two minor modes are defined which are intended to operate in buffers
which contain trace output, as produced by the Dialog debugger.  This
includes enabling the minor modes directly in @code{dialog-debug-mode}
buffers, where new trace output is generated in response to game
actions and debug queries.

@findex dialog-trace-mode
The minor mode @code{dialog-trace-mode} is enabled in
@code{dialog-debug-mode} buffers by default.  When enabled it
propertizes the text of Dialog trace output in order to:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Fontify the leading call depth indicators and the trailing source file
reference to make them visually distinct from the rest of the line.
@item
Turn the source file reference into a button which is highlighted by
the mouse cursor.  Activating the button will open the given file,
switch to its buffer, and move point to the relevant line.
@item
Configure the entire line of trace output to be highlighted when point
is anywhere inside the trace output and
@code{cursor-face-highlight-mode} is enabled.
@item
Assign the keymap @code{dialog-trace-map} which will be active when
point is anywhere on the trace line.
@end itemize

@quotation Note
Although this functionality is not dependent on any other specific
modes, identifying the source file links in trace output does require
that the value of @code{dialog-game-files} is set correctly (see
@ref{Configuring game files}).
@end quotation

With @code{@code{dialog-trace-mode}} enabled, the following commands
have key-bindings when point is anywhere on the trace line:

@multitable {@kbd{RET}} {@code{dialog-trace-display-file-ref}}
@headitem Key-binding @tab Command
@kindex RET
@item @kbd{RET} @tab @code{dialog-trace-pop-to-file-ref}
@kindex o
@item @kbd{o} @tab @code{dialog-trace-display-file-ref}
@kindex n
@item @kbd{n} @tab @code{dialog-trace-forward}
@kindex p
@item @kbd{p} @tab @code{dialog-trace-backward}
@kindex f
@item @kbd{f} @tab @code{dialog-trace-follow-mode}
@end multitable

@vindex dialog-trace-display-buffer-action
@defun dialog-trace-display-file-ref
Switch to the buffer and move to the line number of the file which is
referenced in the trace line at point.  The file will be opened if not
already open.  The customization variable
@code{dialog-trace-display-buffer-action} defines how and where the
buffer should be displayed.
@end defun

@vindex dialog-trace-pop-to-buffer-action
@defun dialog-trace-pop-to-file-ref
Display the buffer and move within the window to the line number of
the file which is referenced in the trace line at point.  The
displayed buffer is not selected.  The file will be opened if not
already open.  The customization variable
@code{dialog-trace-pop-to-buffer-action} defines how and where the
buffer should be displayed.
@end defun

@defun dialog-trace-forward
Move forwards to the end of the next region of trace output.
@end defun

@defun dialog-trace-backward
Move backwards to the start of the previous region of trace output.
@end defun

@findex dialog-trace-follow-mode
The minor mode @code{dialog-trace-follow-mode} enables functionality
which displays source files when trace motions commands such as
@code{dialog-trace-forward} and @code{dialog-trace-backward} are used,
automatically calling @code{dialog-trace-display-file-ref} when moving
between trace lines.  For this feature to work it is required that
@code{dialog-trace-mode} also be enabled.  The customization variable
@code{dialog-trace-follow-restore-window-configuration} determines
whether the window configuration is modified when
@code{dialog-trace-follow-mode} is disabled.

@defopt dialog-trace-follow-restore-window-configuration
Specifies whether the window configuration which was current when
@code{dialog-trace-follow-mode} was enabled should be reapplied when
the mode is disabled.  A non-nil value indicates that the window
configuration should be applied.
@end defopt

When combined with the standard minor mode hook, restoring the window
configuration provides a straight-forward way to temporarily use the
full frame while @code{dialog-trace-follow-mode} is enabled:

@example lisp
;; Configure `dialog-trace-follow-mode' to delete other windows when
;; enabled and restore the original window configuration when
;; disabled.
(setq dialog-trace-follow-restore-window-configuration t)
(add-hook 'dialog-trace-follow-mode-hook
          (lambda ()
            (when dialog-trace-follow-mode
              (delete-other-windows))))
@end example

To highlight lines or recenter buffers as source files are shown, the
customization variables @code{dialog-trace-display-file-ref-hook} and
@code{dialog-trace-pop-to-file-ref-hook} define hooks which are run by
@code{dialog-trace-display-file-ref} and
@code{dialog-trace-pop-to-file-ref} respectively.

@defopt dialog-trace-display-file-ref-hook
A hook which is run after displaying a trace file reference.
@end defopt

@defopt dialog-trace-pop-to-file-ref-hook
A hook which is run after popping to a trace file reference.
@end defopt


@node Browsing the Dialog manual
@chapter Browsing the Dialog manual
@cindex manual
@cindex browsing @subentry the manual

The command @code{dialog-browse-manual} will open the online version
of the Dialog manual, the URL for which is determined by the
customization variable @code{dialog-manual-url}.

@defun dialog-browse-manual
Open the Dialog manual in the default web-browser.  When called with a
prefix argument use the secondary browser instead of the default one.
@end defun

@defopt dialog-manual-url
Specifies the URL for the Dialog manual.
@end defopt

To open the manual using a different browser configure the value of
@code{browse-url-handlers}; if configured to open via
@code{eww-browse-url} it may be preferable to also configure the value
of @code{eww-readable-urls} so that only the main text for each page
will be displayed.


@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include doclicense.texi


@node Keystroke Index
@unnumbered Keystroke Index
@printindex ky


@node Function Index
@unnumbered Function Index
@printindex fn


@node Variable Index
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr


@node Index
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp


@bye
